---
title: "Pharmaceutical Industry"
date: "2024-10-22"
description: "An overview of the pharmaceutical industry's future trends."
---

**Pharmaceutical Purgatory: The Issue with Price Gouging**

Pharmaceutical price gouging is a process where the cost of drug products is excessively increased, leaving consumers and the healthcare sector unable to pay for these products. One example of this is with the drugs Isuprels and Nitropress, which initially had very little competition. The company Valeant bought the rights to these two products and increased the drugs to be 5000% more expensive overnight (Lupkin). Another case involved the EpiPen, a life-saving device for people with severe allergies, whose price increased by more than 400% between 2009 and 2016 (Pflanzer). 
While price gouging financially burdens clients, it also restricts access to life-saving medication for individuals who do not have access to these products. Higher drug prices lead to patients not taking their prescribed medication in the correct way. Such situations involve patients limiting the quantity of their medicated drugs or even giving up treatment. Moreover, price gouging exacerbates healthcare inequity, where the burden of such price increases are predominantly shouldered by those who are less privileged. 

Due to the numerous negative consequences of price gouging, it is apparent that current regulations are not enough to solve the root cause of these issues. The fundamental issues lie in the price system, allowing pharmaceutical companies to set prices based on market demand rather than the clinical value of the drug. Pharmaceutical price gouging poses a significant threat to public health by limiting access to essential medications, driving up healthcare costs, and disproportionately affecting vulnerable populations. Value-based pricing models, which link drug prices to their clinical benefits, offer a more sustainable solution by promoting innovation while ensuring that life-saving treatments remain affordable and accessible. 

Concerns about the economic and public health impacts of pharmaceutical practices, particularly price gouging, have become central to the debate. As demand for life-saving medications rises, it becomes increasingly difficult to differentiate between genuine market-driven price increases and exploitative gouging. There is disagreement among policymakers and business experts regarding the rationale behind companies' price increases during times of crisis. Price gouging prevention regulations have been passed in the US to stop merchants from using these procedures during significant market disruptions, such Hurricane Harvey or COVID-19 (Knutson). A more equitable distribution does not result in a fairer allocation, even while price increases can efficiently distribute resources through scarcity. For example, a $40 case of water may deter hoarders from purchasing the entire stock, but it may also forbid people from acquiring a basic need such as water. This holds great significance within the pharmaceutical sector. While increasing the cost of widely used medications can make it possible, extremely high costs can be imposed on rare medications to profit greatly from the populations that truly require them. Furthermore, these medications may be patentable, making them the only ones available on the market with the capacity to treat specific ailments. There are complements and replacements in conventional economics. While complements go well with other products, substitutes might satisfy the requirement for a comparable product. In this instance, firms can raise the price of their drug products without worrying about substitutes existing throughout the duration of the patient's treatment due to the nature of patents for specific drug items. 
Price manipulation becomes even more problematic when companies have a monopoly on life-saving drugs. While price fixing is illegal in the United States through the Sherman Antitrust Act, other countries might not have such restrictions to ensure fair competition. Even in the United States, pharmaceutical companies can partially avoid these restrictions. There are processes such as shadow pricing where one company observes the pricing of the competitors and raises the prices of its products without talking to the competitors as a tool to increase prices as all the companies would want to raise the price due to raising of the competitors’ prices but no explicit agreements were reached, this enables a number of companies to raise their prices without being accused of collusion because they do not need to seek the permission of any of the other companies. Antitrust regulation is also used by pharmaceutical companies for patent evergreening which is simply renewing patent billions just because of making slight changes to the existing drugs in a bid to retain monopoly power in the market. As such, delaying entry of generic drugs into the market allowing brands to charge higher prices.

The danger posed by the price gouging for pharmaceutical companies is demonstrated through the excessive pricing of drugs. Demand price, a trend where the clinical value of a drug is modeled to the value it brings to the consumer, is a popular idea that most pharmaceutical companies are following. Value-based pricing models attach economic value to drugs relative to the health improvement they offer patients, ensuring that patients get therapies that are practical to them. A practical example here could be the case of Sofosbuvir Sovaldi drug used in treating Hepatitis C. The curing cost of this chronic disease was estimated at $84000 in terms of the Sofosbuvir drug for a 12- week course of treatment. However, this amount is well worth it when taking into consideration the health care costs in the long run that would be incurred if the Hepatitis C was left untreated (Chhatwal). In addition, it has been shown that value-based pricing of drugs is a viable solution to the existing challenges of the pharmaceutical industry and will allow companies to continue innovating in the production of medicines while providing such drugs to the market at an affordable price (Yeung). Equally, the ICER provides real world evidence by models evaluating new indication for oncology drugs. 

To address these pricing issues, governments play a crucial role in regulating the pharmaceutical sector. Imposing price control mechanisms, such as price ceilings on essential drugs, would prevent companies from raising prices to unreasonable levels. For instance, countries like Canada and those many in the European Union have sounded the ceiling on medication prices making it possible to meet the needs of invention and that of public availability of inexpensive drugs. In the United States, where prices of medications have few regulations, allowing for price negotiations for drugs based on a medicare program may potentially save significant amounts of money used in the procurements of drugs necessary for survival. Further, giving the FDA power to fast track approvals of generics would lead to more competition resulting in lower prices. Perhaps an alternative alternative is to introduce reference pricing mechanisms where the government sets a target price for medicines taking into account how much other countries are paying for the same drugs. Such measures as these, together with improved transparency in drug pricing would enhance the responsible use of this industry and enable people to afford safe and effective medicines without compromising on care.

Traditionally, pharmaceutical companies argue that drug prices are high to fund research and development (R&D) for new medications. They state that the investment required to develop new drugs – which often exceeds billions of dollars – justifies the high prices that consumers pay (Rivara). This does not account for individuals who monitor company affairs, work with programs to model this information, or people who work in marketing to show that the drug is effective. Without the ability to make large proceeds from these drug products, the desire to innovate and cure diseases is stagnated. Corporations typically make a large portion of their profits from existing products as opposed to newly manufactured drug products. According to the National Science Foundation, companies typically allocate 5-15% of their revenue on R&D activities, which includes research on already established drug products (Anderson), while spending far more on marketing and shareholder dividends. In addition, the development of generic drugs and biosimilars showcases how sustainable pricing models that provide affordable alternatives to large corporation drug products can still be effective for generation revenue. Rather than relying solely on high prices to make back the investment on a drug product, pharmaceutical companies should explore more transparent pricing strategies and value-based pricing models that reward actual therapeutic benefits rather than market monopolies. This shift would foster innovation while ensuring that life-saving medications remain accessible to all patients. 
Transparency in drug pricing is all but imperative for not only the customer, but for fostering competition across different vendors. With obscure pricing, it is difficult for consumers to evaluate the value of a drug, leading to inefficiencies in healthcare spending. Additionally, policy makers have more difficulty creating regulations that protect consumers from exploitation. Transparency provides an avenue that rewards value-based pricing models and genuine therapeutic advancements. Furthermore, increased transparency allows the public and legislation in general to see how these companies allocate their funds, ensuring that it is going to the proper research and development or marketing pipelines. By making these pricing decisions more visible, companies can show critics who are against price gouging how they invest their resources and thereby drive more equity to essential medicines. 

Drug patents have a dual purpose within the pharmaceutical industry, as they try to ensure both the stimulation of innovation and the access to the drugs. Patents fundamentally motivate companies to invest in research and development since they will be able to make money from their investments after a few years of selling the drug without any competition. This exclusivity enables revolutionary inventions and guarantees that the companies will always be willing to commit resources on strategies aimed at coming up with and developing new drugs. At the same time, drug patents mean that there will be monopolies and only one form of the drug – the patented drug – that would be available for treatment of any one ailment. If a patented drug is the only effective medication for an illness, patients’ inability to pay can lead to an imbalance in healthcare delivery where lower-income patients are unable to access certain healthcare options. Introducing additional barriers to entry like alterations of patent details aimed at keeping drugs out of competition as ‘patent evergreening’ also helps in retaining higher prices due to poor competition. Patents while playing an important role in providing the wheels of furthering the wheels of innovative ideas to completion, there is a need to have complementary measures in place which will ensure that such lifesaving drugs are available to all the relevant patients as soon as the innovators rights expire.
In conclusion, the practice of drug price gouging poses dire risks to public health as it worsens inequities and limits the ability to access life-saving drugs. The situation outside of this trend is characterized by extensive price manipulation, monopolistic behavior, and other patterns such as circumvention of patents that undermine the very invention the system is designed for. In this case, the companies sell the drugs at high prices, claiming that the revenues are used for drug research and development. However, a good portion is spent on advertising and paying shareholders, leading patients to shoulder the burden. Value-based pricing models present a viable solution, linking drug prices to their clinical effectiveness and ensuring that life-saving treatments remain accessible to those in need. Fundamentally, these structural problems are not only economic in nature and demand social justice, but also need to be addressed to ensure the safety of all people. By prioritizing transparency and equitable access in drug pricing, we can foster a healthcare system that promotes innovation while ensuring that everyone, regardless of their financial means, has the opportunity to benefit from advancements in medicine. This is not merely an economic concern but a moral imperative that demands urgent action to protect the health and well-being of our communities.















**Works Cited**

Anderson, Gary. “U.S. R&D Increased by $72 Billion in 2021 to $789 Billion; Estimate for 2022 Indicates Further Increase to $886 Billion | NSF - National Science Foundation.” National Science Foundation, 15 Nov. 2015, ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsf24317. 

Chhatwal, Jagpreet, et al. “Cost-Effectiveness and Budget Impact of Hepatitis C Virus Treatment with Sofosbuvir and Ledipasvir in the United States.” Annals of Internal Medicine, U.S. National Library of Medicine, 17 Mar. 2015, www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4435698/.

Knutson, Evan. “A Perspective on Price Gouging: An Exploitative Benefit.” The Economics Review, 23 Mar. 2021, theeconreview.com/2021/03/23/a-perspective-on-price-gouging-an-exploitative-benefit/. 

Lupkin, Sydney. “A Decade Marked by Outrage over Drug Prices.” NPR, NPR, 31 Dec. 2019, www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2019/12/31/792617538/a-decade-marked-by-outrage-over-drug-prices. 

Pflanzer, Lydia Ramsey. “The Price of an Epipen Has Skyrocketed More than 500% since 2009 - and Senators Are Asking for Answers.” Business Insider, Business Insider, 22 Aug. 2016, www.businessinsider.com/epipen-price-increases-about-500-percent-2016-8. 

Rivara, Frederick. “The Year in Review, 2021.” JAMA Network Open, JAMA Network, 25 Mar. 2022, jamanetwork.com/journals/jamanetworkopen/fullarticle/2790524. 

Yeung, Kai, et al. “Value-Based Pricing of Us Prescription Drugs: Estimated Savings Using Reports from the Institute for Clinical and Economic Review.” JAMA Health Forum, U.S. National Library of Medicine, 2 Dec. 2022, www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9856524/. 
